

Why the Terra / Luna protocol Will Almost Certainly Fail
Phil Berent
·
Apr 4, 2022



1. The Point

TerraUST (ticker UST) is an “algorithmic stablecoin”. The Terra/Luna protocol uses a system of incentives to keep the UST price at its $1 “peg”. Over the last few months, the capitalization of UST has achieved a meteoric rise, from just under $3 Billion in November of last year, to around $16.6 Billion at time of writing (April 4, 2022).

UST is effectively “self-collateralized” by a support coin called Luna. As long as the market capitalization of Luna is greater than the nominal value UST, UST is over collateralized, and holders of UST are safe.

Currently Luna has more than twice the capitalization of UST, and so for the time being UST is able to stay close to its peg. The price of Luna will probably keep rising as long as the usage of UST increases. However, the demand for UST can’t continue to rise indefinitely. Once a steady state is reached it seems unlikely Luna will pay sufficient rewards to make it worthwhile to hold positions (see section 5 below). At this point, capitalization of Luna is likely to fall to below the outstanding nominal amount of UST. If this occurs UST will cease to be fully collateralized.
On the "Liar Paradox"
I do think that the RS approach absolutely does solve the Liar paradox. Actually, this was my starting point. 
Here is why:

1. Statements and Referent Spaces
So, let's go back to my starting point.
- I define a "statement" as a sequence of words or symbols that says something about something. 
- I define the thing that it says something about as "the referent."
- I define the "world talked about in a statement" as "referent space" of that statement.
- If a statement refers to a given RS let’s say that the statement has that RS as its "context."
2. Types of RS
Because of your review, I have realized that there are actually two distinct types of referent space.

- A "physical RS" is an RS about which statements describe the entities and interactions in an actual or imagined physical world. 

- An "axiomatic RS" is an RS where statements allow us to draw conclusions which are implicit in the set of axioms that define the RS.
I should note that a physical RS can also be limited in scope where statements are limited to describing a particular set of entities or physical interactions.
If an RS accurately reflects the real world ("RW") we can call it a "real RS". If an RS does not accurately reflect the RW we can call it an "imaginary RS"
3. True, False and Meaningless Statements
In the context of a given RS, we can:
- define a "true statement" as "a sequence of words or symbols which says something which is consistent with the way things are in the specified RS" - 

- define "false statement" as "a sequence of words or symbols which says something which is inconsistent with the way things are in the specified RS"
- define a "meaningful statement" as "a sequence of words or symbols which says something about the way things are in the specified RS". A meaningful statement will always be either true or false. This does not necessarily imply that at any given time we will know whether the statement is true or false.  
- define a "meaningless statement" as "a sequence of words or symbols which says something which does not imply anything about the way things are or are not in the specified RS". We could alternatively state this as "a statement is meaningless if it says nothing about its contextual RS."
- define an "RS statement set" as the set of all true or false statements that can be made referring to the way things are in an RS.
4. The Meaning of “The Way Things Are” in an RS
I suppose that we need to drill down a bit on what I mean by "the way things are".
4.1 In a Physical RS
In a physical RS this refers to the accurate description of physical entities and of the interactions between them. 
As the RW is a physical entity, all of the elements that are in it are either physical or can be mapped one-to-one basis to a specific set of physical entities or processes. Thus, for example, if we say "Sarah loves old movies" we are indirectly referring to the physical processes that take place in her brain. In effect we are saying "Sarah's neurological processes lead her to feel and act in a way which would commonly be identified as an appreciation for old films." Note that "the way she feels" also corresponds to specific physical processes in her brain. We could find similar corresponding physical meanings for "commonly identified" and "appreciation".
Clearly in common usage we make statements including concepts which don't refer directly to their physical counterparts. However, every meaningful concept does have a physical counterpart. Emotions (as we said above) are a manifestation of neurological processes; color and the taste of food are a combination of physical entities and our perception of those entities; and so on. 
Therefore, every meaningful statement about the RW explicitly or implicitly implies a statement about physical entities or interactions between physical entities in the RW.
Thus, if our RS is the RW, then a statement which is "consistent with the way things are in the RS" either explicitly or indirectly correctly describes physical entities that exist in the RW or the interactions between those entities.
4.2 In an axiomatic RS
In an axiomatic RS "the way things are" is simpler. In this context a statement is "consistent with the way things are in the RS" if it is directly implied by the axioms of the RS, otherwise it is false. (yeah, okay there are loopholes to be filled here - but please read on)
5. Meaningless Statements Referring to an RS
Note that statements can refer to entities or interactions that exist in a given RS but still be meaningless, if they apply qualities to those entities which they do not possess. For example, the statement "The square root of elephant is albatross" in an RW context is meaningless because although we understand the concepts of "square root", "elephant", and "albatross", animals do not possess the quality of "square root." 

6. Consistency 
If we say an RS is internally consistent, we mean (1) every statement we can make about that RS is either true or false. (2) no two true statements about the RS can be contradictory.  
If our RS is the RW, then the set of all true statements with an RW context (i.e. statements which are not false or meaningless) must be internally consistent, as if they are not this is surely a problem with our definition of "consistency" as the RW itself cannot be inconsistent.
7. Why Do We Care About Statements?
So before returning to the Liar Paradox we need to ask a question which is more general, but which in my opinion is fundamentally important:
"Why do we care about statements?"
There are two answers to this which I will call respectively the "strong contention" and the "weak contention" (sorry if these names sound a bit "pseudo-philosophical")
Strong contention:
We care about statements because either. 
(a) a statement tells us directly or indirectly, or might possibly tell us, about the existence of entities in the real world; or qualities of those entities; or how entities in the RW interact with each other. 
or 
(b) a statement directly or indirectly affects our emotional state 
Weak contention:
We care about statements because. 
(a) a statement tells us directly or indirectly about the existence of entities in the real world or some other referent space; or qualities of those entities; or how those entities interact with each other. 
or
(b) a statement directly or indirectly affects our emotional state 
The point of the strong contention is that although we can certainly care about statements which refer to some type of imaginary self-consistent RS other than the RW, we only care about those statements because they can be used to give us insights into the RW. For example, 'i' is defined as the "square root of minus 1" this is an "imaginary number".  Nowhere in the RW can we actually see a quantity of 'i' things. This is also true of course of negative numbers. Despite the fact that we could argue that these numbers exist only in an imaginary RS and not in the RW, considering these imaginary quantities allows us to build bridges, design electrical circuits and so on. Thus, from this perspective we only care about statements made in the context of an imaginary "physical" or "axiomatic" RS's because they can ultimately be used to develop true statements about the RW.
Note that in the strong contention I include that we might care about statements in an imaginary RS because "they might possibly tell us" (as opposed to "certainly tell us") something about the RW. For example, it might be worth investigating a mathematical paradigm based on axioms that do not reflect the RW, even if we can see no direct RW implications, on the basis that in the future we might find some RW implications of this axiomatic system.
The strong contention also says that we might also "care" about a statement not because it tells us anything true or false about the RW, but rather because it can make us happy or sad or can invoke some other emotion. For example, poetry or fiction do not necessarily give us any information about the RW either directly or indirectly, but they can nevertheless give us pleasure - and therefore we "care". 
Let's consider the weak contention. This implies that as well as statements about the RW we can "care" about statements with the context of an imaginary RS which tells us nothing about the RW, and can never under any conceivable circumstance tell us anything about the RW. (if they could conceivably have implications for the RW then they are covered by the strong contention) Let’s call such an RS a "categorically reality detached RS".  
So, if they can never tell us anything about the RW, why would we care about such statements? One answer that might be given is that certain mathematical conjectures are worth pursuing for their own sake or can be described as "fascinating" or "beautiful". However, if the only purpose in examining a given RS is intellectual enquiry for its own sake, for the pleasure and interest in doing so - then surely this is also covered by the "strong contention" part (b): that we can care about statements solely because they can affect our emotional state. Thus, we can see the examination of such "categorically reality detached RS's" as equivalent to reading poetry or listening to music.
For now, let's just assume the "weak contention". That is, we care about statements because they tell us something about a real OR imaginary RS.
Let's look at examples of some statements and examine why we might "care" about them.
For example, consider the following statements having an RW context.
"That road is closed."
"That dog will not bite"
"The forecast says it's going to rain tomorrow."
We care about these statements because knowing whether they are true or false directly affects our understanding of the real world and can change our actions based on that understanding.
Here are statements about an imaginary RS.
"Jack then climbed up the Beanstalk."
"Alice met the Red Queen."
In this case we care about the statements directly because they give us an element of understanding of the imaginary RSs, respectively of Jack and the Beanstalk and of Alice Through the Looking Glass. Indirectly we care because the understanding of these fictional worlds gives us pleasure.

Here are statements about an axiomatic RS.
2+2 = 4
The sin of 30 degrees is .5.
In this case we care about the statements because we can use them in practical situations, among other things to enumerate objects or in geometric calculations which have many practical uses.
Let’s look again at the meaningless statement
"The square root of elephant is albatross" (assuming its context is the RW)
This statement is meaningless and tells us nothing about the RW. We might still care about it if we find it amusing or irritating. In other words, we might care about it because it directly or indirectly affects our emotions - but not because it tells us anything about its RS.

8. Considering the Liar Paradox
So back to the Liar Paradox: "This statement is not true". (We will call this the "Liar Paradox Statement" or "LPS")
We can take a number of perspectives on the RS of this statement.
(1) We argue that this statement is made in the context of the RW reference space or some other internally consistent physical RS. 
Above I made the argument that as the RW is a physical entity all statements "about" the RW either directly or indirectly imply corresponding statements about physical entities or the interactions of those entities. Statements with an RW context, which have no implication for physical entities or interactions in the RW are therefore meaningless (as defined above). The LPS, however, does not refer to any physical entities or interactions in the RW. By looping back on itself and therefore having itself as referent, it avoids making any "comment" on the RW. Thus it "says nothing about the way things are in its contextual RS” and in terms of our definition above it is therefore meaningless.
The same logic applies if this statement is made with the context of some other internally consistent real or imaginary physical RS.
(2) We can argue that his statement is made in the context of an axiomatic RS. 
(i) If the set of axioms that define the RS does not include the LPS as an axiom, then the LPS says nothing about entities or interactions within the RS. As with the context of a physical RS, the LPS makes "no comment" on entities or interactions within the RS and is therefore meaningless.
(ii) If the LPS itself is one of the axioms that define the RS then either
(a) This axiom is self-contradictory; in which case we can't include it in the axioms to define an internally consistent RS or
(b) We in some way define the LPS as an axiom and say axiomatically that this statement is not self-contradictory. This is fine as, since the statement refers only to itself, including this as an axiom has no effect on "the way things are" in the RS (i.e. which statements in the context of the RS are true or false). However, the statement in the context of this RS is no longer paradoxical as we have defined it axiomatically not to be so.
(3) We can argue that the LPS has no RS - as it doesn't refer to anything outside itself.
We have defined a true statement as one which correctly reflects "the way things are" in its RS, and a false statement which incorrectly describes the way things are in its RS. Thus, if a statement has no RS, it cannot be true or false - those qualities simply do not apply. The LPS or even its counter "This statement is true" are meaningless because the quality of truth or falsity cannot be applied to something that does not have an RS. Thus, these statements are equivalent to "The square root of elephant is albatross". This statement is meaningless because animals do not have the quality of "square root".  Similarly, the LPS and its counter statement are meaningless because they have no RS, and therefore the subject of these statements "this statement", does not have the quality of truth or falsity.
In summary, if we assume that the LPS has a physical RS, or we say that the LPS has no RS, then the LPS is meaningless. If we have a self-consistent axiomatic RS which does not include the LPS as an axiom, then once again the LPS is meaningless. If we include the LPS as one of the axioms of an internally consistent axiomatic RS, then we need to state axiomatically that the LPS is not paradoxical and thus the paradox goes away. So, no matter how we look at this, the “problem of LPS” goes away, as is either meaningless or unparadoxical.

9. Non Self-Referential Versions of the LP
In the course of researching this I have found other "versions" of the LP which have avoided direct self-reference. They can however be easily solved in exactly the same way as the LP - I will explain:
As I have looked through more of the literature, I have found alternative formulations of increasing obscurity and complexity but all equally meaningless (IMHO) and increasing my frustration with every new twist of un-necessary complexity and apparent accompanying self-righteousness (ok I will stop ranting now)
One example which I found which forms the basis of many different "versions" of the LP is the following:
Agnes says: Bert's statement is true.
Bert says: Agnes' statement is false.
(Call this the "Agnes/Bert LP")
The paradox here is clear: if Agnes is speaking the true then she must be lying. If she is lying, she must be speaking the truth. It also seems at first glance that these are not self-referential - each of them is talking about something in the world - the other one's statement. 
Another similar example is to consider a book where the first sentence on page 102 says "the first sentence on page 102 is false". (call this the "first sentence LP")
The solution of these and many other "versions" of the LP is simple.
I hate to add additional complexity, but I have realized (looking at increasingly ridiculous and complex "versions") that what we really need to talk about is "assertions" rather than statements. By an "assertion" - I mean what is actually said by one or more statements.
Often to make an assertion we will need only one statement. e.g. "this is an orange" is a statement which makes an assertion. However, the statement "first sentence on the next page is false" is not complete in itself. In order to know what assertion is being made we need to also know the text of that sentence is (the first sentence on the next page). Depending on what it is the "assertion" could be true, false, or meaningless. 
e.g. If the first sentence on the next page is:
“This book is on earth” (true) - the assertion is therefore false.
“This book is on Mars” (false) - the assertion is therefore true.
“The square root of elephant is albatross” (meaningless) - the assertion is therefore false.
Let’s first consider the Agnes/Bert LP. In this case both Agnes' and Bert's statements are incomplete - thus they ARE NOT SAYING ANYTHING AT ALL IN THEMSELVES. In each case to know what they are "asserting" we need to know the content of the other statement. Once we know this the "assertion" of each becomes clear. 
For Agnes: Once we know Bert's statement, we understand that Agnes's assertion (the implication of her statement) is "I am lying" - or if you prefer Agnes is implying and NO MORE THAN THIS that in making her statement, she is telling a lie.
The same thing applies for Bert.
But now we are back to the simple LP. Saying "This statement is a lie" is meaningless because nothing is referred to by the statement. The assertion is not lying about Agnes' height, her date of birth, the atomic weight of Hydrogen, how to bake bread, the price of gas, the solution of an equation or anything else - the assertion has no RS therefore does not have the quality of truth and falsity and is therefore meaningless.
The "first sentence LP" has a similar solution. The statement "the first sentence on page 102 is false" is incomplete as its truth or falsity depends on another statement - the first sentence on page 102. As it is incomplete it does not make an assertion. However, once we know that the first sentence on page 102 is the sentence itself, then we understand that the assertion being made is "this sentence is false" - and of course the same thing applies the assertion has no RP and is therefore meaningless.
As I say I hate to add complexity, but we should probably add a new type of statement. Previously we had true, false and meaningless statements. We should probably add another category of statements as "incomplete”. Where a statement “S1” is classified as "incomplete" where it refers to one or more additional "referenced statements" (S2, S3, etc.) and we cannot determine what assertion is being made by S1, until we know the assertions being made by the "referenced statements" of S1. In fact, it is possible that the referenced statements will themselves be incomplete and in order to determine the assertion of S1 is may be necessary to follow an entire chain of reference for each of the statements referenced by it in order to determine the assertions made by each of those statements.  
9. What's The Point?
So why do I care about this in the first place? When I initially stumbled across Godel's incompleteness theorem at undergrad - I came to the same conclusion that is that: "Although it may be possible to make meaningless statements using mathematical language, Godel does not show us that mathematics will ever draw false conclusions or that 'logic is incomplete' - it just shows us that we can use mathematics to speak gibberish"
(I should emphasize that it is at least 10 years since the last time I looked at Godel - so I am way rusty)
This is hardly surprising. If mathematics is a language (which I am sure would be widely disputed) then the ability to talk gibberish should not be surprising. I can say in grammatically correct form "The smelly equation was louder than yesterday" - which is completely meaningless. Why should meaningless statements not also be possible using mathematical symbols? If they are possible why does anyone think this puts "the foundations of mathematics" in question, any more than my nonsense statement undermines the validity of the English language.

I was amazed to see that people seem to draw real world implications from this. Things such as "Science is incomplete and there are truths that we can never know". I have even seen the suggestion that Godel's proof shows that there are computer algorithms which can never be solved, or that maybe Godel has implications for trying to discover algorithms to predict primes.
I have probably got wrong the precise implications that people have drawn from the existence of these "paradoxes" - and this would be the next area of research. But the point is that my impression is that people DO think that they have genuine implications - and I don't. How can they? These paradoxes are all meaningless statements which say nothing about anything. How could it be possible that a meaningless statement which refers neither to a real or imagined RS can tell us anything at all about any RS? 

Thus, for example people have developed alternate set theories to "get around the problems" of standard set theory. In my opinion this is completely unnecessary. The existence of Russel's paradox does NOT show that using standard set theory will ever lead to drawing an incorrect conclusion about reality or about any other RS, nor does it show that standard set theory prevents us from "missing out" on any true conclusions about an RS. All it shows us is that we can talk gibberish using standard set theory. I don't know for sure, but I would imagine that whatever alternative set theories have been developed will still allow us to "talk gibberish" in other ways.

Sorry if this has turned into a bit of a stream of consciousness rant - but in summary my point is people think this stuff is "wow amazing" (the 1000-page book "Godel Escher Bach" for example) and has astounding implications - but it just doesn't. In fact, it implies nothing at all.



There seems to be a generally held belief that once a coin is widely enough used, full collateralization doesn’t really matter, and that therefore UST will be able to keep its peg just because everyone “believes it has value”. After all, the argument goes, national fiat currencies and gold only have value because the market believes in them. Actually, as discussed below (see Section 6) this is not correct: both fiat currencies and gold have much firmer foundations than just “the belief of the market”. Essentially, a currency will have stable value only if it is collateralized, or if prices are explicitly denominated in that currency. Neither of these apply to UST.

If the market capitalization of Luna falls below nominal value of UST, it is likely the market will lose confidence in the protocol, Luna will quickly fall to near zero, and UST will lose its peg. The same thing could happen at any time if the current enthusiasm becomes blunted and the market starts to doubt the validity of the protocol.

Algorithmic stable coins with protocols very similar to Terra/Luna have been tried and have failed. I think that there are very good reasons to expect that it is only a matter of time before Terra/Luna goes the same way.

2. What Makes a Stablecoin “Safe”

We can think about the safety of different (so called) stablecoins by considering the question: “What would happen in each case if the market lost confidence in the coin’s value?”.

If holders of the coin don’t suffer losses, even if people stop believing in it, then it seems like we are looking at something pretty solid.

Conversely, if a loss of confidence would result in a price crash — then the value of positions in the coin is sustained by no more than a nebulous cloud of the unfounded faith of the other market participants. If and when people realize this, they have an incentive to sell first, and loss of trust becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy¹

Centralized & Collateralized Stablecoins pass this test. Centralized collateralized stablecoins are issued and managed by central authority and backed by deposits of US dollars. Every stablecoin in circulation is matched by $1 of deposits in bank or trust accounts. Holders can redeem their coins at a rate of $1 per coin at any time by selling them back to the issuing authority.

The largest collateralized centralized and redeemable stablecoins are USDC, USDB, and PAX, having a combined capitalization of over $70 Billion.

Let’s consider what would happen in the case of a loss of confidence. For example, let’s assume that someone starts a false rumor that the coins are not truly backed by collateral. Holders would rush to redeem their coins and (assuming that the rumor is actually false) all holders would still get back the full value of their positions.²

Terra Luna does not pass the test. As is explained below, if people stop having faith in the protocol, it will almost certainly fail.

3. How Terra / Luna Protocol Works

The Terra/Luna protocol was built by Terra Form Labs in South Korea. The protocol is designed to support a number of stablecoins. The largest of these is TerraUST (ticker UST) which has a current market capitalization of $16.6 Billion. The next largest is TerraKRW pegged to the South Korean Won which currently has a capitalization of just over $30 Million.

The protocol aims to keep UST at its $1 price without the use of any external collateral.

Here is how it works:

The system has two coins. UST and Luna. Holders of UST can always swap $1 worth of Luna for 1 UST, or 1 UST for $1 worth of Luna.

If the price of UST rises above $1, anyone can give $1 worth of Luna to the protocol and get 1 UST in return. This creates an arbitrage opportunity. I buy $1 of Luna, swap it with the system for 1 UST, sell my UST for more than $1, and walk away with a profit.

Therefore, if the UST price exceeds $1, everyone will be buying Luna and selling UST. The additional supply of UST will drive its price back down to the $1 peg.

Conversely, if the price of UST falls below its peg, anyone can supply UST to the protocol and get $1 worth of Luna at the then current market price. The idea is that as holders know that they can always get $1 worth of Luna for each UST that they hold, the price can never fall below its $1 peg.

What could go wrong, right?

Unfortunately, this doesn’t really work. The system is still subject to failure in the case of a loss of confidence.

4. What Happens If The Market Loses Confidence Terra Luna?

If the market were to lose confidence in UST, but to still trust in the value of Luna (at least under current circumstances) all would be well. The current capitalization of Luna is just over $40 Billion. This is more than twice the value of UST in circulation. All holders of UST could therefore exchange their positions for Luna; sell the Luna at market price, and so close their positions without loss.

The problem will occur if the market loses confidence in the protocol as a whole. Currently there are $16.6 Billion UST in circulation. If people were to stop believing that the combined value of UST and Luna is worth less than the UST in circulation, then the system would fail. Under these circumstances the fact that holders “can always exchange UST for $1 worth of Luna” wouldn’t help. As holders of UST tried to get out of their positions, more and more Luna would have to be issued driving the price down.

The problem is that the system is “self-collateralized” by Luna. If the market value of the Luna collateral falls below the outstanding issuance of UST, no algorithm, regardless of how clever, can ensure that holders of UST can exit their positions without loss. The value is simply not there.

Ultimately, in the case of a loss of confidence in the protocol, the price of Luna would fall to close to zero and of course UST would be unable to hold its peg.

This is exactly what happened to the Iron Finance’s attempt at an algorithmic stablecoin in June of last year. The protocol worked in a very similar way to Terra. In this case the stablecoin was “Iron” and the “support coin” was “Titanium”. People lost confidence in the protocol and, as we would expect, the Titanium price fell to close to zero. However, as protocol was partially collateralized by USDC (a fully collateralized and redeemable stablecoin) the value of Iron fell only to a low of just under $0.75, which was approximately equal to the value of the underlying collateral. (see Cointelegraph June 2021)

5. Terra/Luna’s business plan

Luna is effectively the equity backing Terra. All of the income earned by the protocol either goes to holders of Luna or is re-invested in the protocol.

The Terra/Luna protocol aims to earn revenue by charging fees for transactions. The whitepaper states that the Terra will achieve wide-spread usage as they intend to charge much lower fees than the major credit card companies. The “base fee” for transaction, they say, will be 0.1%, and fees are capped at 1%.

So far it has been profitable to hold Luna. Terra is only issued in exchange for Luna. Therefore, as the demand for Terra grows, so does the demand for Luna. This has driven up the price from around $59 at the end of November 2021 to $110.37 today.

At a certain point, even if that’s far in the future, the demand for Terra will stop growing. Thereafter it will be attractive to hold Luna only if the protocol generates sufficient revenues.

If Terra is to be fully collateralized, then the market value of Luna needs to be at least as great as that of UST. Let’s assume (conservatively) that a minimum attractive return for holding Luna is 5%.
Even assuming this relatively low target return, and that 100% collateralization is sufficient, this would mean with fees at 0.1%, that the average holder of Terra would need to spend their entire balance at least 50 times per year.

This is because each time all the Terra in existence is spent it would generate a return of 0.1% to Luna (the transaction fee). Therefore, a turnover of 50 times per year would be necessary to get to our target return of 5%. Even if Terra/Luna decides to raise transaction fees to the maximum level of 1%, everyone would still have to spend all of their UST an average of 5 times per year for Luna to achieve a return of 5%.

If we assume that the required collateralization rate is above 100% the required rate of transactions is even greater.

The frequency with which money is spent over a given period is called the “velocity”. The St Louis Fed tells us that the current annual velocity of money is 1.12 — in other words money held in cash or in bank accounts is spent an average of 1.12 times per year.

It seems unlikely that holders of UST will spend their balances fast enough to generate sufficient revenues to support Luna once the demand for UST reaches a steady state.

This implies that if and when the demand for UST stops growing, it will become unattractive to hold Luna, and the Luna price will fall. At this point UST will become under-collateralized and I believe that the protocol will fail.

Maybe then, it’s not important that the protocol should be fully collateralized?

6. Okay Confidence is Important, but What’s the Problem?

So, I’m hoping that it’s clear that if people stopped believing in the value of the Terra Luna protocol, UST would have a hard time maintaining its peg.³

However, people have been happy to hold UST, and investors have enthusiastically supported the protocol based on the idea that this doesn’t matter. More specifically there is a widespread belief that this is exactly equivalent to the situation faced by national fiat currencies which are also uncollateralized. The fact that these currencies have successfully held value, so the argument goes, is only because “people believe in them”. If it’s works for the U.S. Dollar and the Euro, why not for Terra?

Similarly, the argument is made for gold that it “only has value because everyone thinks that it does”.

In both cases this is incorrect. Fiat currencies and gold have much firmer foundations than just shared belief in their value. To understand why, we first need to look at what we mean by “Loss of Confidence”.

6.1 What do we Mean by “Loss of Confidence” ?

So far I have only talked in general terms about “loss of market confidence”. To understand the difference between cryptos and fiat currencies, we need to be a bit more precise.

Currencies have worth because they can be exchanged for goods and services. No one cares per se about the number of monetary units that they hold; they care about the stuff that those units will enable them to buy.

Therefore, for this paper, I will define “market confidence” in a currency or a crypto to specifically mean the confidence that the bundle of goods and services for which that asset can be exchanged will not decline precipitously over time.

In other words, by “market confidence” in an asset, I mean the confidence that this asset will maintain its “purchasing power”.

I stated above that holders of fully a collateralized stablecoins will be protected from loss, even if the market loses confidence in that currency. Given my definition of “market confidence” this could be restated more precisely as:

“Holders of fully collateralized stablecoins will be protected from loss, even if the market ceases to have confidence in the purchasing power of those coins.”

Similarly, my concerns about Terra Luna could be restated more precisely as:

“Holders of Terra will not be protected from loss if the market ceases to have confidence in the combined purchasing power of Terra and Luna”

6.2 Why Fiat Currencies Can Maintain Value Without Collateral

We have said that potential “loss of confidence” is a problem for cryptos. This is equally a problem for fiat currencies. However, if we use definition of “confidence” given above, the difference between fiat currencies and non-stable cryptocurrencies becomes clear.

The question then becomes: Are we confident that the asset will not lose large amounts of its purchasing power?

Although most national currencies are not explicitly backed by an asset, they have intrinsic value and stability because there is a “universal agreement” to use them as the denominator for prices and wages.

Wages and prices are “sticky” and don’t change by large amounts on a moment-to-moment basis. This means that if we own currency, we know what we can buy. We know what our currency is “worth”.

This is not however true for non-stable cryptos.

To say that an asset is “collateralized” means that we know that as a last resort it can be exchanged for the collateral. This implies that as long as the collateral has value, the asset value is protected.

Effectively therefore, as long as the “universal agreement” holds, national currencies are “collateralized” by all of the goods and services that are available for sale.

I can hear the screams of dissent. But please consider:

- We value currency for the goods and services it allows us to buy

- As long as the “universal agreement” holds we are guaranteed to be able to exchange our currency for known amounts of goods and services

- This is the definition of collateralization: the currency can be exchanged for something of known value.

Of course, fiat currencies can fail if the universal agreement breaks down. This can happen with hyperinflation or government failure. But then no collateral is 100% secure.

However, this means that we can be “confident” in the value of fiat currencies (that is, confident that they will not lose most of their purchasing power) unless we expect hyperinflation or government collapse.

6.3 Why Crypto Currencies are Different from Fiat Currencies

No non-stablecoin cryptocurrency is used as a denominator for prices and wages. You can buy cars, real-estate, or just about anything else using Bitcoins. However, in all cases the underlying price is really in U.S. Dollars, or some other national currency, and the Bitcoin price is determined using the Bitcoin/USD exchange rate at the time of the sale.

Therefore, a position in Bitcoins, or any other non-stable crypto, does not have a defined value in goods and services. Price is simply determined by demand, which is in turn driven almost exclusively by future expectations of price. This means that there is no “fair value”, and this causes the price volatility that we see in the crypto markets to far exceed the exchange rate volatility of fiat currencies. For example, US Dollar/Yen exchange rate over the last year had an annualized volatility of 5.96%, whereas the Bitcoin price (equivalent to the US Dollar/Bitcoin exchange rate) had an annualized volatility of 73.85% (Source: Yahoo finance)

Let’s consider what would happen if everyone came to believe with a high degree of confidence, that in one year from now Bitcoins would be worth less than they are today. The vast majority of Bitcoin balances are held as “an investment”, so almost everyone would sell, and the price would collapse. A small proportion of Bitcoins are held as transaction balances (mainly by drug dealers and cyber-criminals) so the price would find a floor, but at far below the current level.

This is a slight over-simplification as some cryptos, including Luna, pay fees or dividends. In some cases, again including Luna, holdings of the crypto are required to engage in mining or other profitable activities. So, in these cases we can only expect a collapse in price if the total return on holding the crypto, including any fees and dividends, is expected to be negative.

Let’s ask the same question for U.S. Dollars. What would happen if everyone came to believe with a high degree of confidence, that in one year from now the U.S. Dollar will be worth less than today? Well, this is of course exactly the situation that we face. The current inflation rate is around 8% (U.S Bureau of Labor Statistics) which means that in a year’s time we can expect our holdings of Dollars to buy less goods and services than they do today. However, unlike what we would expect with cryptos, people are not rushing to sell their Dollars for Yen, Euros or Bitcoins.

This is because, despite the expected fall in value, the universal agreement to denominate prices in U.S. Dollars means that the best way we can protect our purchasing power is to hold U.S. Dollars, or dollar denominated assets.

This is a vast difference. For the market to “lose confidence” in a fiat currency there has to be a generalized expectation of hyperinflation or government failure. For the market to “lose confidence” in a cryptocurrency, there just has to be a generalized expectation that holding the currency will result in a negative return.

6.4 A Stable (Non-Stablecoin) Cryptocurrency IS Possible

In order for a cryptocurrency to have a relatively stable price, it needs to have relatively consistent purchasing power. In order to achieve this, prices need to be denominated in that currency and be relatively stable over time.

Hypothetically we can imagine a market for real estate, cars or other goods and services were sellers posted prices in Bitcoins, and guaranteed to transact at these prices for a period of at least a month.

If the market were large enough, it would mean that a value in Bitcoins would, as fiat currencies do, represent the right to a specific amount of goods and services, and the Bitcoin price would stabilize.

Stability could also be achieved by creating an asset that could be exchanged for a specific amount of a commodity such as kilowatt hours of energy, or agricultural commodities.

The point is that to achieve price stability a cryptocurrency needs to represent a consistent value in goods and service.

6.5 How About Gold?

It is often argued that cryptocurrencies are the “new gold” and are therefore a rational investment as a store of value or a hedge against inflation. Once again, the argument is that gold only has value, because everyone believes that it does.

The misses the point that gold does have intrinsic value. There are several industrial applications, but these make up a relatively small proportion of total demand. The main value of gold is the subjective consensus that gold is beautiful. Gold has been valued for its beauty across multiple continents and cultures for at least five thousand years.

This is reflected in the fact that 46.3% of the world’s gold exists in the form of jewelry, far exceeding the amounts held for private investment or in national reserves (Gold.org Feb 2021 estimate).

Holding gold, or investment funds linked to gold, may or may not yield good long term returns. This depends on what happens to supply, and the demand for its various uses. However, given that it has been valued for its beauty for thousands of years, and that there is no expectation of a large new source of supply, it is likely that it will continue to be a highly valued commodity

(For a fuller explanation see Bitcoins Are Not Digital Gold)

7. The Problem for Terra Luna

I have tried to show that for a currency or cryptocurrency to stable in long term, people need to be confident in the amount of goods and services for which it can be exchanged.

This can be achieved either if the currency is backed by collateral, or if there is a large market for goods and services with stable prices denominated in that currency.

UST can’t be expected to maintain its value just because “the market believes in it”. If people start to suspect that the value of their holdings is subject to the whims of others, there will be an incentive to sell. This is particularly true as there are fully collateralized stablecoins which do not have the same risks.

This means that UST can be expected to hold its peg only as long as it is at least 100% collateralized by Luna.

The price of Luna will keep rising as long as the demand for UST is increasing. However, once demand reaches a steady state, it is difficult to see how the protocol will generate sufficient revenues to make it attractive to continue holding Luna. At this point the price of Luna will fall. When this happens, UST will cease to be fully collateralized, and we can expect a loss of confidence in the protocol which will probably result in a complete failure of both Luna and UST.

[1] This is a classic “Prisoner’s Dilemma”. All holders would be better off if no one liquidates their positions. However, if others liquidate, anyone left holding UST will lose. As each holder is acting independently and cannot control the actions of others, everyone has an incentive to liquidate so as avoid loss.

[2] The stablecoin with the greatest outstanding value is Tether, issued by the company Tether Limited. Tether has a current market capitalization of close to $82 Billion. Tether also claims to be fully collateralized. However many have expressed doubts as to whether this is actually the case (see Bloomberg October 7th 2021). Tether is also not redeemable. We can’t be certain therefore, what would happen if the market lost faith in the value of Tether.

[3]If anyone is still not convinced, imagine that I replicate all elements of the protocol exactly, with two coins called Doomed Stablecoin (DmUSD) and Worthless Supportcoin (WTS). I’m pretty sure that WTS would never gain any traction and that DmUSD would not keep its peg. The only difference between my hypothetical failed attempt and Terra/Luna is the confidence of the market

