
Discussion of Curry's Paradox
Let’s start by remembering that I define a "meaningless statement" as "a sequence of words or symbols which says nothing about its contextual RS.”
The Curry paradox involves a statement of the form "If this statement is true then F" where F is a statement which is known to be false. Let’s call this the "Curry Paradox Statement" or 'CPS'. An example could be the one you give "If this statement is true then 2+2=5". Note that we can also see that more generally the CPS is a conditional statement of the form "If A then B" where "A" is the statement itself.
Before going on to consider the CPS let’s consider similar statements which are not self-referential and can be shown to be meaningless.
Take for example a statement of the form "If F then S" where F is a statement which is known to be false, and S is any statement at all. The point about this type of statement is that it would only make a claim about its contextual RS if F were true. Since we know that F is false this statement makes no claim about its contextual RS and is thus meaningless. An example might be "If I am on Mars, I am an Iguana". This statement is certainly not true as it could only be evaluated for truth or falsity if I was indeed on Mars - for the same reason it’s not false either. As I am not on Mars the statement makes no claim about whether or not I am an Iguana or about anything else. In other words, it says nothing about entities or interactions in its RS and in terms of the definition above it is therefore meaningless.
(Ok I know there is a problem with this as "Classical Logic" would say this statement is "vacuously true" and not meaningless - see Note at end)

Let’s return to the CPS and use the example "If this statement is true then 2+2=5". 
If we assume this statement is true it does indeed refer to the RS - that is, it tells us something about how things are in the real world. Specifically, it tells us for example that if I take two sets of two apples and put them side by side, I will have five apples. We know that this is false. In summary if we assume the statement to be true then it is not meaningless (as it says something about its RS), but it gives us an implication that we know to be false - therefore we know that the CPS cannot be true.

Let’s consider if the CPS might be false. We noted above that the CPS is a conditional statement of the form "If A then B". The only way for such a statement to be definitively false is if A is true and B is false.  Thus, as in the CPS we replace "A" with the CPS itself, the only way for the CPS to be definitively false is if "A" is true and therefore the CPS is true. Therefore, if CPS is false then CPS is true, and we again have a contradiction. Therefore, the CPS cannot be false.

How about if CPS is "meaningless" in terms of our definition? That is to say let's assume that the CPS has no implications for entities or interactions in its RS. The CPS is "If this statement is true then F". If we assume the CPS is meaningless then it is not true. The CPS only makes the claim F, IF it is true. As it is not true it makes no claim about F. In fact, if it is not true it makes no claim at all about anything in the RS - and thus in terms of our definition is "meaningless". Therefore, if we say that the CPS is meaningless the result is not paradoxical. That is to say that an assumption that the CPS is meaningless leads to the conclusion that it is indeed meaningless. 

We can therefore conclude that the CPS is not paradoxical. It is neither true or false, just meaningless.

More intuitively without going through all of the above logic we can see that the statement "If this statement is true then 2+2=5" doesn't tell us anything about anything. We gain no knowledge or understanding of any real or imaginary world from the statement - it may not instantly clear without analysis why this is the case - but in general if a statement tells us nothing then surely it is meaningless - even before we go through the rigmarole of unwinding the convoluted puzzle used to create it.

Note on "vacuously true statements". Apparently Classical Logic tells us that a statement of the type if "If A then B" is always "true" when A is false. (let’s call this "A Conditional Statement Where the Premise is False" or "CSPF". I suppose this means that the hurdles I have to face are even greater than just challenging the LP and its variants. If one brings in the concept of an RS (whether axiomatic of physical) it becomes clear that a CSPF tells one nothing about its contextual RS and therefore in the terms I have defined is "meaningless" rather than "true". I'm not sure I understand why Classical Logic insists that a CSPF should resolve to "true". I'm guessing it because there is an underlying rejection of the concept of meaningless statements - that is, there is an insistence that every statement must resolve as "true" or "false". But surely even the most ardent classical logician must recognize the different between the "truth quality" of a (1) statements like "that is an Orange", "or the sin of 30 degrees is .5” (which respectively make claims about a physical and an axiomatic RS) and (2) a statement like "If I am on Mars, I am an Iguana" which makes a claim about nothing at all. It seems strange that there is no differentiation between these two different types of "truth."

But all that being said, I don’t think I need to argue with Classical Logic. After all, "true" and "false" are just words. If my definitions of "true" and "false" and "meaningless" are not acceptable I am quite happy to use different terms which have a specific meaning. Say p-truth (for "Phil's version of truth"), p-false, and p-meaningless.
Thus, I define (as previously) a statement as "p-true" if it says something which is consistent with the way things are in its RS, "p-false" if it says something which is not consistent with the way things are in its RS, and "p-meaningless" if it has no implications for anything in its contextual RS. I don't think it changes the strength of my argument to say that the LP and the CPS are "p-meaningless" rather than "meaningless" as the point is that whatever one chose to call this quality, the LP, variants of the LP and the CPS make no comment about the real world or about any other physical or axiomatic RS. As they make no comment about any RS, they cannot imply that any RS is itself paradoxical and any apparent paradox just exists within the language used rather than in the contextual referent spaces of these statements. And that really is the point. Surely these apparently paradoxical statements are only interesting if they imply that "physical reality”, or some real or imaginary axiomatic systems are themselves paradoxical. If this is not implied, then surely, we are just showing no more than that it’s possible to make "interesting puzzles" with language.
