Phil Berent


·
Apr 30, 2020






Memories of Anna (Part 1 — Milan)

My mother passed away this morning.

Actually I should rephrase that:

We always called her Anna — which was a source of embarrassment to me for much of my youth — as she would never tolerate being called “mum”. She was equally intolerant of euphemisms. Therefore, I should say “Anna died this morning”.

My earliest memory is lying in my cot when we lived in Milan in Italy. Anna came in to the room looking beautiful and told me that she was going to smoke a cigarette and then come back to say good night. I waited for a long time and she didn’t come back.

We lived in a 19th Century block of flats with carved statues over an imposing street entrance leading to a courtyard. We lived on the 5th floor in a large flat with a balcony looking out over the courtyard. My brother Anthony is a year older than me. He and I would fold paper darts, throw them from the balcony, and watch them float down. We had two cats that Anna named Mimi, and Buttons. We added a kitten which we found crying on one of the landings. We brought it home and my father Paul said firmly “we are not keeping that cat”, but Anna named it “Tiddles” and it stayed.

Tiddles chased a pigeon off the edge of the balcony and fell five floors to the courtyard. I came across Anna bending over her as I was leaving for school. I was sure that she would die and cried all of the way to school. However Tiddles recovered but suffered from then on with a petrified leg which clunked on the wooden floors as she ran.

The boiler in the kitchen exploded. Anna came out with her legs cut and bleeding, but completely calm. The dining room was flooded with two inches of water but Anna told us to keep eating our breakfast. So we kept eating cornflakes, while she got someone from the building to come up and start on repairs.

Anna was beautiful. Everywhere we went the shopkeepers and vendors would proclaim their admiration. The Ice Cream man said “Oh signiora, the sun only shines for me when I see you”. The grocer would say “Signiora you are so beautiful” and give Anthony and me free sweets.

She believed in encouraging us to be independent. When I was three years old she used to send Anthony and me out to the news stand to get the “Corriere De La Sera”. We had to cross a busy street and Anna would watch us from the window to make sure that we were okay. From the age of five, I used to walk and take the bus to and from school.

Anna taught us to read from a Victorian Reader called “Reading Without Tears”. She read to us from Alice, Treasure Island, Stories of Greek and Roman Gods, Arthurian Legends, and a beautifully illustrated edition of Mid-Summer Night’s dream — much of which I was too young to understand. She taught us about fire safety by lighting newspaper fires on the stone kitchen floor, and having us put them out by covering them with pots and pans and blankets.

After school Anna would sometimes take us to a nearby café where we would get Cokes and listen to the latest Beatles’ songs on the jukebox.

She didn’t really believe in baby sitters — but then I think that kids were left to their own devices a lot in those days. We would spend time playing with other kids in the courtyard. One time the rubbish man, who was another of Anna’s admirers, took Anthony and me for a tour of the maze of tunnels under the flats which were fed from the rubbish shutes in each flat. He found a discarded toy and gave it to us to take home. This crossed the line for Anna. I remember that she seemed angry. She said the toy was dirty and that we couldn’t keep it — and that we shouldn’t be friends with the rubbish man any more. I didn’t really understand why.

Anthony and I had a carpentry set and would try to build flying machines by sawing up and nailing back together bits of nursery furniture. I really believed that one of our constructions would fly. Paul once said that we were not allowed to use the saws unless Anna or he was watching. We thought this was a silly restriction and Anna certainly didn’t insist

We learned to ride bicycles. I remember being put on a bike by an older boy who pushed the bike and then let go. I fell over and cried. This happened several times. Eventually I learned, and after this we started taking cycle trips around Milan. I was always the instigator but never knew how to get anywhere. Anthony had amazing navigation skills and could find his way to and from anywhere; I still don’t really understand how. One time we decided to go and see Paul at his office. I remember his look of shock when we arrived. I asked Anthony recently if he remembered this. He told me he did — and the proceeded to astound me when he assured me that he still knew the route we had taken!

My wife Laura is shocked at how we were left to our own devices and says that we were “raised by wolves”. I still am grateful to Anna to encouraging us to be self-reliant and self-confident.


21





Phil Berent
